# Naive Realism and Sense datum Theory

What is the disagreement between the Naive Realist and the Sense Datum Theorist? Instead of assuming this disagreement is about the nature of the objects of perception, as is commonly proposed, I suggest that we should locate this disagreement purely at the level of a proper characterisation of what pereiving is like. A basic methodology in the philosophy of perception tries to distil facts about the nature of perceptual experience from facts about what it is like to perceive. If perceptual experience is what it seems to us to be, then we may take such facts about what it is like to perceive at face value. My suggestion is that the Naive Realist and Sense Datum Theorist disagree about what facts we may take at face value, when we may take what it is like to perceive at face value.

Both the Naive Realist and the Sense Datum Theorist assume that there is positive introspective support for the view that perception is a conscious presentation of objects that are distinct from and independent of the perception itself.

This assumption is frequently discussed under the heading of the transparency or diaphanousness of experience. Not only Naive Realists and Sense-Datum Theorists accept this assumption, but the alleged transparency or diaphanousness of experience has played a pivotal role in arguments against rival views.

There are, however, two layers to the transparency of experience that are easily conflated. Transparency tells us that, when we introspect our perceptual experience, it seems to us as if we’re presented with some mind-independent (experience-independent) thing. Moore’s project in ‘The Refutation of Idealism’ is to explicate and defend this phenomenological truth. Let’s consider an example. Say you are looking at a blue rug on the floor. In normal circumstances at least, such a perception has a phenomenology that suggests to you that you are conscious of something other than our own mind or perceptual experience. There’s seems to be something ‘out there’, so to say. Yet, the thing we’re conscious of cannot appear to us _simpliciter_; it will always appears to us in some way or other. If it is a blue rug, it is likely to appear blue. And at least if you are familiar with rugs, it will appear to be a rug.

When we introspect our perceptual experience, it may be hard to separate the way the experience strikes us from the way the object of experience strikes us. It may be easy to confuse the perception of the rug with the rug itself. That is one of the main grievances Moore has about some forms of Idealism.

Now of course, as people like P.F. Strawson have pointed out, when we ask someone to report on how their experience of seeing that rug strikes them, they are extremely likely to report that it seems to them as if they are presented with a blue rug. (Perhaps the ‘as if’ locution is unnatural to use here. The point is that they will report seeming to be visually aware of a rug.) However, if we are more careful here, then we should say that what they should have said was: “It seems to me as if I am presented with some other thing, something that appears to be a blue rug.” This description teases apart more carefully the two layers of appearance involved in the experience. It brings out that, strictly speaking, the experience-independence of the object seems to be manifest to us in a way that is different from the way the nature of the object of experience seems to be manifest to us. Transparency only covers the first, not the second. And it is not obvious exactly what the second layer—the observation that the object of experience appears to be a rug—contributes to the theory of perception. (It would perhaps be more plausible to suggest that the second observation tells us something about the way rugs look, but again: rugs are not identical to perceptions of rugs.)

If we accept this diagnosis, then we can use it to shed light on the disagreement between the Naive Realist and the Sense Datum Theorist. When you introspect your perceptual experience, you are likely to find that it seem to you as if you are aware of some entity that is distinct from the experience you are trying to introspect, and that, typically, that entity seems, at least on the basis of how it appears, to you to be (or be part of) some familiar physical object (e.g. a rug, or (the side of) a car). The Naive Realist suggests that in the philosophy of perception we may take all of this at face value, unless of course we hear an argument to the contrary (e.g. an argument from illusion or hallucination). In the absence of such arguments, these appearances may be taken to be a good guide to what perceptual experience is. Accordingly, for the Naive Realist the dialectical high- ground in the philosophy of perception—a high-ground they desire to occupy and defend—is the assumption that perceptual experience is a presentation of (a) an object distinct from the experience itself that (b) is just one of the familiar, physical objects in our environment (or perhaps some part of those).

On the other hand, the Sense Datum Theorist (and I am mainly thinking of Moore at the moment) suggests that the dialectical high-ground includes less than this. When we consider the starting point of the debate about perception or experience, we must not jump to conclusions about the nature of the objects we experience. So on the one hand, Moore accepts Transparency, and so accepts that if we take the experience at face value we may assume that perceptual experience is a presentation of some entity that is distinct from and independent of the experience we are introspecting. But he also urges us not to move beyond the appearance of that entity. If all we do is take the experience at face value, we should be careful not to overstep ourselves. All the experience gives us is an apparent presentation of an experience-independent thing that appears to be a familiar object. And because what we’re doing is report on how the character of the experience strikes us, not how the character of the object of experience strikes us, we shouldn’t say that the experience, when taken at face value, affords us access to the nature of that object (e.g. being a rug)—it would only afford us access to the appearance of that nature. In this way, Moore has grounds for correcting on the Naive Realist’s description of the phenomenology of perception, as he often seems to do.

If the project of finding the proper starting point in the philosophy of perception is indeed to be understood as a project of cashing out the ‘face value’ of perceptual experience, then the Naive Realist and the Sense Datum theorist seem to be in disagreement well before the Sense Datum theorist gets a chance to say what they take the objects of experience to be.
